Upgrade Guide: Reflect changes in service registration in NServiceBus v10 (#7984)
Particular/docs.particular.net: nservicebus/upgrades/9to10/index.md

### Change in more detail

In previous versions, NServiceBus registered all infrastructure components (handlers, sagas, behaviors, etc.) in the service collection during assembly scanning. In v10, these components are no longer registered but still support constructor injection.

Before (v9 and earlier) (pseudo-code):

```csharp
// Infrastructure types were registered in the service collection during scanning
services.AddScoped<MyHandler>(); // Registered by NServiceBus
services.AddScoped<MySaga>(); // Registered by NServiceBus
// This was possible but not intended
var handler = serviceProvider.GetService<MyHandler>(); // Could resolve directly
```

After (v10):

```csharp
// This is no longer possible
var handler = serviceProvider.GetService<MyHandler>(); // Returns null
var handler = serviceProvider.GetRequiredService<MyHandler>(); // throws an Exception
// But dependency injection still works perfectly
public class MyHandler : IHandleMessages<MyMessage>
{
    public MyHandler(IMyService myService) // Still injected!
    {
        // myService is resolved from the service collection
    }
}
```

### Changes required

> If no handlers, sagas, behaviors etc were resolved directly then there is **no action required**. They will continue to work exactly as before with full dependency injection support.

Author: Is this buried too far down?

Reviewer: Yeah, but getting rid of the previous section fixes it. However…

```suggestion
If handlers, sagas, behaviors, etc. are not directly resolved using `GetService<T>()` or similar, then there is **no action required**. They will continue to work exactly as before with full dependency injection support.
```

> If code directly resolves handlers, sagas, or other NServiceBus infrastructure from IServiceProvider or direct constructor injection, the code needs to be refactored. This pattern was never intended and indicates logic that should be extracted into proper services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If one of these conditions is not true, the code needs to be refactored. This pattern was never intended and indicates logic that should be extracted into proper services.
```

So instead of

```csharp
// Treating a handler like a service
var handler = serviceProvider.GetService<MyHandler>();
handler.DoSomething(); // This confuses application and framework layers
```

adjust the code to something like

```csharp
// Extract the logic to a proper application service
public interface IMyBusinessLogic
{
    void DoSomething();
}

public class MyBusinessLogic : IMyBusinessLogic
{
    public void DoSomething() { /* ... */ }
}

// Register it as an application service
services.AddSingleton<IMyBusinessLogic, MyBusinessLogic>();

// Use it in the handler (framework layer)
public class MyHandler : IHandleMessages<MyMessage>
{
    private readonly IMyBusinessLogic _businessLogic;

    public MyHandler(IMyBusinessLogic businessLogic)
    {
        _businessLogic = businessLogic;
    }

    public Task Handle(MyMessage message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
    {
        _businessLogic.DoSomething();
        return Task.CompletedTask;
    }
}

// Resolve and use the service
var businessLogic = serviceProvider.GetService<IMyBusinessLogic>();
businessLogic.DoSomething();
```

> ### Further benefits of the change

Author: The only thing I might want to preserve is the DI stuff.I think that resonates with a certain audience but I'm also not super hung up on it either

```

…adjust the code to be structured similar to:

```csharp
// Extract the logic to a proper application service
public interface IMyBusinessLogic
{
    void DoSomething();
}

public class MyBusinessLogic : IMyBusinessLogic
{
    public void DoSomething() { /* ... */ }
}

// Register it as an application service
services.AddSingleton<IMyBusinessLogic, MyBusinessLogic>();

// Use it in the handler (framework layer)
public class MyHandler : IHandleMessages<MyMessage>
{
    private readonly IMyBusinessLogic _businessLogic;

    public MyHandler(IMyBusinessLogic businessLogic)
    {
        _businessLogic = businessLogic;
    }

    public Task Handle(MyMessage message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
    {
        _businessLogic.DoSomething();
        return Task.CompletedTask;
    }
}

// Resolve and use the service
var businessLogic = serviceProvider.GetService<IMyBusinessLogic>();
businessLogic.DoSomething();
```

### Further benefits of the change

By keeping infrastructure components out of the service collection, clean separation is maintained:

- Framework layer: Handlers, sagas, behaviors managed by NServiceBus

> - Application layer: Services, abstractions, and business logic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Application layer: Services, abstractions, and business logic managed by user code
```

Final adjustments to settings before configuration is finalized should be applied via an explicit last configuration step on the endpoint configuration, instead of via implementations of this interface discovered by scanning.

## Service registration changes

NServiceBus v10 changes how infrastructure components are registered and resolved. Infrastructure types such as handlers, sagas, behaviors, installers and custom checks that users should never directly resolve are no longer registered in the service collection, while still supporting dependency injection for their own dependencies.

This change aligns with fundamental principles in software architecture:

- The [Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_inversion_principle) states that high-level modules (business logic) should not depend on low-level modules (framework infrastructure). Both should depend on abstractions.

> - The [Hollywood Principle ("Don't call us, we'll call you")](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Hollywood_principle) describes the relationship between frameworks and application code. NServiceBus calls handlers and sagas when messages arrive. Application code should never call handlers directly.

Author: ```suggestion
- The [Hollywood Principle](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Hollywood_principle) describes the relationship between frameworks and application code. NServiceBus calls handlers and sagas when messages arrive. Application code should never call handlers directly.
```

This design aligns with how modern .NET frameworks handle infrastructure:

- ASP.NET Core doesn't register controllers by default
- Blazor doesn't register components
- Minimal APIs don't register endpoint handlers

NServiceBus now follows the same established patterns.

For those using [`ValidateOnBuild`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.extensions.dependencyinjection.serviceprovideroptions.validateonbuild) or [`ValidateScopes`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.extensions.dependencyinjection.serviceprovideroptions.validatescopes) on their service collection, having fewer registrations provides concrete benefits:

- Faster validation: Fewer services to validate means quicker startup times
- Fewer false positives: Infrastructure types often have complex lifetime requirements that can cause validation to fail even though NServiceBus manages them correctly
- More reliable builds: Validation focuses on application services where issues are more likely to occur
- Clearer diagnostics: When validation does fail, it's about application services, not framework internals

> # Extensibility

Author: ```suggestion
## Extensibility
```

This change aligns with fundamental principles in software architecture:

- The [Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_inversion_principle) states that high-level modules (business logic) should not depend on low-level modules (framework infrastructure). Both should depend on abstractions.
- The [Hollywood Principle](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Hollywood_principle) describes the relationship between frameworks and application code. NServiceBus calls handlers and sagas when messages arrive. Application code should never call handlers directly.

When infrastructure components are registered in the service collection, they become part of the application's public API. This creates a problem: developers can accidentally depend on framework internals that should be implementation details, and it becomes tempting to use the Service Locator anti-pattern (resolving from `IServiceProvider` directly) instead of proper constructor injection.

> ASP.NET Core follows these same principles. Controllers are not registered in the service collection by default, yet they fully support dependency injection. This is the right architectural boundary: the framework manages its own infrastructure while users manage their application services.

Author: ```suggestion
ASP.NET Core follows these same principles. Controllers are not registered in the service collection by default, yet they fully support dependency injection. This is the right architectural boundary: the framework manages its own infrastructure while users manage their application services.

For those using [`ValidateOnBuild`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.extensions.dependencyinjection.serviceprovideroptions.validateonbuild) or [`ValidateScopes`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.extensions.dependencyinjection.serviceprovideroptions.validatescopes) on their service collection, having fewer registrations provides concrete benefits:

- Faster validation: Fewer services to validate means quicker startup times
- Fewer false positives: Infrastructure types often have complex lifetime requirements that can cause validation to fail even though NServiceBus manages them correctly
- More reliable builds: Validation focuses on application services where issues are more likely to occur
- Clearer diagnostics: When validation does fail, it's about application services, not framework internals
```

### Changes required

If both of the following conditions are true of all handlers, sagas, behaviors, etc. then **no action is needed**, and they will continue to work exactly as before with full dependency injection support:

* Not resolved directly using `GetService<T>()` or similar
* Not used as a constructor injection argument in another class

If one of these conditions is not true, the code needs to be refactored. This pattern was never intended and indicates logic that should be extracted into proper services.

Instead of:

```csharp
// Treating a handler like a service
var handler = serviceProvider.GetService<MyHandler>();
handler.DoSomething(); // This confuses application and framework layers
```

…adjust the code to be structured similar to:

```csharp
// Extract the logic to a proper application service
public interface IMyBusinessLogic
{
    void DoSomething();
}

public class MyBusinessLogic : IMyBusinessLogic
{
    public void DoSomething() { /* ... */ }
}

// Register it as an application service
services.AddSingleton<IMyBusinessLogic, MyBusinessLogic>();

// Use it in the handler (framework layer)

> public class MyHandler : IHandleMessages<MyMessage>

Author: ```suggestion
public class MyHandler(IMyBusinessLogic businessLogic) : IHandleMessages<MyMessage>
```
